Modify docs for HA masters (#491)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/basics/ha-masters/index.md

date: 2020-05-16
weight: 120
type: page
categories: ["basics"]
---

# High availability Kubernetes masters

## Synopsis

Kubernetes master nodes are the nodes that run the Kubernetes API of a tenant cluster,
as well as some other important components. In the case of Giant Swarm, the master nodes
also host the [etcd](https://etcd.io/) database that keeps all the state that configures
the cluster, the workloads and other resources.

Clusters can run in a fully functional way with one master node, however this renders the
Kubernetes API unavailable in certain cases like a cluster upgrade or even an outage of
the underlying infrastructure.

With AWS release v{{% first_aws_ha_masters_version %}} new tenant clusters are launched
with three master nodes in different availability zones by default, increasing the API
availability during upgrades and cluster changes drastically and making the cluster more
resilient against data center failure.

## Benefits

Multiple master nodes in different availability zones has several benefits:

- **API downtimes during upgrades are reduced to a minimum**. With a single master node,

>   upgrading the cluster requires the only master to be terminated and rebooted with new configuration, resulting in several minutes of downtime. With multiple master nodes, the nodes get update one at a time. The API can only become unreachable in the event that a new etcd leader has to be elected. This usually takes only a few seconds.

Author: Fixed

- **Resilience in case of infrastructure outages**. In the case of a failure of a single
  master node's EC2 instance, the two remaining master nodes take over and a replacement
  master node will be launched automatically. Since multiple master nodes of a cluster are running in different availability zones (AZ), this setting also protects against the risk of losing control over the cluster in the case of a single AZ downtime. Read [below](#use-of-az) for details.
- **Load balancing of API requests.** Read-only requests to the Kubernetes API are performed
  by all three master nodes, so that latencies stay lower overall compared to a single master
  node which can suffer from high loads temporarily.

> We recommend that all productions clusters on AWS are run with high

Author: Fixed

purposes or clusters which don't need the high availability and resilience.

## Use of availability zones {#use-of-az}

When high availability master nodes is activated for a cluster, the three
master nodes are spread over different availability zones (AZ). Depending on
the number of AZ in the region, the logic is:

- With **three or more AZs** in the region, each master node is assigned to a different AZ, selected randomly.
- With **two AZs** in the region (as is the case in `cn-north-1`), both AZs get used. Two master nodes will share the same AZ.

When [converting a single master cluster to high availability](#conversion-to-ha),
the AZ used by the master node before is re-used. Additional AZs are assigned
by applying the logic described above. Here, the AZ assignment of existing
worker [node pools](/basic/nodepools/) is taken into account.

## Upgrades from previous releases {#upgrades}

When upgrading a cluster to release v11.4.0, the cluster will remain a single
master cluster during and after the upgrade. The API unavailability during the
upgrade that is typical for single master clusters will apply for this upgrade.

> A conversion to high availability can be triggered manually after the upgrade

Reviewer: `manually` sounds painful to me. Can we add somehow that manually means with the click of a button in the web UI?

Author: Done

is finished.

## Conversion from single master to high availability {#conversion-to-ha}

Single master clusters using release v{{% first_aws_ha_masters_version %}} or
above on AWS can be converted to master node high availability in the user
interfaces and via the APIs.

## Via the web UI {#web-ui}

The web UI presents information on the master node in the cluster details page.
Next to these details you find a button _Switch to high availability…_, unless
the cluster is currently undergoing an upgrade. Click this button and follow
the instructions in the web UI.

## Via the CLI (`gsctl`) {#gsctl}

> The `gsctl` CLI provides the [gsctl update cluster](/reference/gsctl/update-cluster/) to change cluster details. Check the reference for the `--master-ha` flag.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense a version of gsctl when this flag is enabled?

Author: > Would it make sense a version of gsctl when this flag is enabled?

I don't understand the question.

Reviewer 2: Sorry forget to add an `add`. I was just curious if we also release gsctl with a version and if we can specify the version here when `--master-ha` flag is available

Author: Done

> The `gsctl` CLI provides the [gsctl update cluster](/reference/gsctl/update-cluster/) to change cluster details. Check the reference for the `--master-ha` flag.

Author: ```suggestion
The `gsctl` CLI as of v0.23.1 provides the [gsctl update cluster](/reference/gsctl/update-cluster/) to change cluster details. Check the reference for the `--master-ha` flag.
```

## Via the Rest API {#rest-api}

Check the [v5 cluster modification API reference](/api/#operation/modifyClusterV5) to find out how to convert a cluster programmatically using the Rest API.

## Via the Control Plane K8s API {#cp-k8s-api}

Two resources have to be changed in order to convert a single master cluster
to high availability.

1. `AWSControlPlane`
2. `G8sControlPlane`

### `AWSControlPlane`

The cluster's [`AWSControlPlane`](/reference/cp-k8s-api/awscontrolplanes.infrastructure.giantswarm.io/)
has a `.spec.availabilityZones` array which, in case of a single master
cluster, has only one item. This item is the availability zone assigned to the
only master node.

To convert the cluster to high availability, this array has to be extended
to have three items. Each item specifies the availability zone for one master
node after the conversion.

> **CAUTION:** Order is important here. The first item must be left untouched. Or, in other words, what was the only array item before must be the first of three item after the change.

Reviewer: @anvddriesch @paurosello is this true? Just asking because I am not into the details of defaulting. I was in general confused because in the operator we sort the AZs before using them so the order shouldn't make a big difference.

Author: It is my understanding of this thread: https://gigantic.slack.com/archives/C0148R1G12N/p1592236645153400

Reviewer 3: Then we need to test this, order is important I think

Author: I'll simplify this so that only the `G8sControlPlane` change is mentioned, to leave the `AWSControlPlane` change to automation.

Example for a cluster in region `eu-central-1`:

The `AWSControlPlane` shows this spec (shortened):

```yaml
spec:
  availabilityZones:
  - eu-central-1c
```

The resource gets changed to this:

```yaml
spec:
  availabilityZones:
  - eu-central-1c
  - eu-central-1a
  - eu-central-1b
```

### `G8sControlPlane`

The [`G8sControlPlane`](/reference/cp-k8s-api/g8scontrolplanes.infrastructure.giantswarm.io/)
has a `.spec.replicas` attribute which indicates the number of master nodes to
run. This is `1` for a single master cluster and needs to be modified to `3`.

> **Note:** Modifying the `G8sControlPlane` resource must happen _after_ the `AWSControlPlane`

Reviewer: @anvddriesch @paurosello same here. Is the order important still?

Author: It is my understanding of this thread: https://gigantic.slack.com/archives/C0148R1G12N/p1592236645153400

modification in order to have full control over AZ usage. Otherwise the `AWSControlPlane` will
be modified automatically and AZs will be added by our automation. This may or may not
be your desired way.

## Technical details

### Why three master nodes

At Giant Swarm we operate "stacked" clusters where etcd nodes are running on the same machines
as the Kubernetes master nodes. Each master node runs control plane components and a member of
an etcd cluster.

In order to achieve high availability in an etcd cluster, a quorum (majority of members) is
needed. With three members, one member is allowed to become dysfunctional at any time, e. g.
through a machine failure or availability zone outage.

The number of three masters running three etcd members is a good balance between resilience
and cost. While it would be technically possible to run five or more master nodes, this
is not currently supported with Giant Swarm tenant clusters.

## Limitations

- Currently only supported AWS, not on Azure and KVM.

> - API downtimes are still possible during cluster modifications, especially when the leader of the

Reviewer: I would like to add that the disruption is **brief** and **negligible** when using backoff strategies client side.

Author: Done

- Why three master nodes?

> At Giantswarm we operate stacked HA clusters where etcd is stacked on top of our master nodes. 

Author: ```suggestion
At Giant Swarm we operate stacked HA clusters where etcd is stacked on top of our master nodes. 
```
